ESSAY WRITING (50 marks)
Candidates will be required to spend 50 minutes on this section. There will be five questions in all, and candidates will be required to answer only one question.

The questions will test candidates’ ability to communicate in writing.

The topics will demand the following kinds of writing:

(i) letter;
(ii) speech;
(iii) narrative;
(iv) description;
(v) debate/argumentative;
(vi) report;
(vii) article;
(viii) exposition;
(ix) creative writing.
Credit will be given for:

Content: relevance of ideas to the topic and its specified audience and purpose;
Organization: formal features (where applicable), good paragraphing, appropriate emphasis and arrangement of ideas;
Expression: control of vocabulary and sentence structure;
Mechanical Accuracy: grammar, punctuation and spelling.
The minimum length expected will be 450 words.

SECTION B
COMPREHENSION (40 marks)
Candidates will be required to spend 50 minutes on this section. The section will consist of two passages each of about three hundred (300) words. Candidates will be required to answer questions on the two passages.

The questions will test the candidate’s ability to

(i) find appropriate equivalents for selected words and phrases;
(ii) understand the factual content;
(iii) make inferences from the content of the passages;
(iv) respond to uses of English expressions to reveal/reflect sentiments/emotions/attitudes;
(v) Identify and label basic grammatical structures, words, phrases or clauses and explain their functions as they appear in the context;
(vi) identify and explain basic literary terms and expressions;
(vii) recast phrases or sentences into grammatical alternatives.
The passages will be chosen from a wide variety of sources, all of which will be suitable for this level of examination in terms of theme and interest.

The passages will be written in modern English, which will be within the experience of candidates.

The comprehension test will include a total of three questions based on (vi) above in any one paper.

SECTION C
SUMMARY (30 marks)
Candidates will be required to spend 50 minutes on this section. The section will consist of one prose passage of about five hundred (500) words and will test the candidate’s ability to:

(i) extract relevant information;
(ii) summarize the points demanded in clear, concise English;
(iii) present a summary of specific aspects or portions of the passage;
(iv) avoid repetition, redundancy, and extraneous material.
The passage will be selected from a wide variety of suitable sources, including excerpts from narratives, dialogues and expositions of social, cultural, economic and political issues in any part of the world.

PAPER 2
LEXIS
In addition to items testing knowledge of the vocabulary of everyday usage (i.e. home, social relationships, common core school subjects), questions will be set to test the candidate‟s ability in the use of the more general vocabulary associated with the following fields of human activity:

Building;
Plumbing;
Fishing;
Finance – commerce, banking, stock exchange, insurance;
Photography;
Mineral exploitation;
Common manufacturing industries;
Printing, publishing, the press and libraries;
Sea, road, rail and air transport;
Government and politics;
Sports and entertainment;
Religion;
Science and Technology;
Power production – hydro, thermal, solar;
Education;
Transport and Communication;
Military;
Journalism and Advertising.
Idioms
That is, idiomatic expressions and collocations (e.g., “hook, line, and sinker,” “every Tom, Dick, and Harry,” etc.), the total meaning of which cannot be arrived at simply by consideration of the dictionary meanings of the words in the structures in which they appear.

Structural Elements of English
For example, the sequence of tenses, the matching of pronouns with noun referents, and the use of correct prepositions.

Figurative usage
In the testing of figurative language, candidates will be expected to recognize when an expression is used figuratively rather than literally.

STRUCTURE
The structure here is used to include:

The patterns of changes in word forms that indicate number, tense, degree, etc.;
The patterns in which different categories of words regularly combine to form groups, and these groups, in turn, combine to form sentences;
The use of structural words, e.g. conjunctions, articles, determiners, prepositions, etc.
PAPER 3
ORAL ENGLISH (50 marks)
This paper will test candidates knowledge of oral English. There will be three alternatives for this paper: Alternative A for school candidates in The Gambia and Sierra Leone, Alternative B for private candidates in The Gambia and Sierra Leone, and Alternative C for Nigerian candidates only.

ALTERNATIVE A: LISTENING COMPREHENSION
This paper will be a Listening Comprehension Test. This will be made up of 100 multiple-choice objective items:

Recognition of consonants, consonant clusters, vowels, diphthongs, stress and intonation
Understanding of dialogues and narratives.
Section 1: Test of word-final voiced-voiceless consonants in isolated words, mainly,but other features, such as consonant clusters, may also be tested.
Section 2: Test of vowel quality in isolated words
Section 3: Test of vowel quality and consonant contrasts in isolated words
Section 4: One of the three alternatives below will be used in different years:
test of vowel and/or consonant contrasts in sentence contexts;
test of vowel and consonant contrasts in isolated words – to be selected from a list of at least four-word contrasts;
test of vowel and consonant contrasts through rhymes
Section 5: Test of rhyming
Section 6: Test of comprehension of emphatic stress
Section 7: Test of understanding of intonation through short dialogues
Section 8: Test of understanding of the content of longer dialogues and narratives
CONSONANTS
(a) Single Consonants – Candidates should be able to recognize and produce all the significant sound contrasts in the consonantal system of English.

For the guidance of candidates, a few examples of such contrasts are given below.

Initial Medial Final
they – day
buzzes – buses
boat – both
ship – chip
parcel – partial
breathe – breed
fan – van
sopping – sobbing
wash – watch
pit – fit
written – ridden
leaf – leave
pit – bit
anger – anchor
cup – cub
tuck – duck
faces – phases
cart – card
card – guard
prices – prizes
gear – jeer
(b) Consonant Clusters – Candidates should be able to produce and recognize consonant clusters which may occur both initially and finally in a syllable.

They should also be able to recognize and produce the consonant sounds in a consonant cluster in the right order.

For the guidance of candidates, a few examples are given below.

play – pray
rains – range
sting – string
felt – felled
scheme – scream
sent – send
crime – climb
nest – next
flee – free
ask – axe
three – tree
lift – lived
true – drew
missed – mixed
blight – bright
seats – seeds
tread – thread
hens – hence
drift – thrift
lisp – lips
glade – grade
coast – coats
marks – masks
VOWELS
(a) Pure Vowels
(b) Diphthongs
(c) Triphthongs

Candidates should be able to recognize and produce all the significant sound contrasts in the vowel system of English.

For the guidance of candidates, a few examples of such contrasts are given below.

seat – sit
sit – set
peck – pack
pack – park
cart – cat
load – lord
pair – purr
park – pork
hard – heard
word – ward
let – late
cheer – chair
pet – pat – part – pate
hat – heart – height – hate – hut
part – port – pot – pat
caught – cot – cut – curt
pool – pull – pole –
bird – bed – bared
but – bat
STRESS
(a) Word Stress – Candidates should be able to contrast stressed and unstressed syllables in words that are not otherwise distinguished.

In addition, they should be aware of the possibility of shifting stress from one syllable to another in different derivations of the same word with a consequent change in vowel quality.

For the guidance of candidates, a few examples of changing word stress are given below.

INcrease (noun) inCREASE (verb)
IMport – imPORT
REbel – reBEL
CONvict – conVICT
EXtract – exTRACT
REcord – reCORD
SUBject – subJECT
(b) Sentence Stress – Candidates should be aware that stress in sentences in English tends to occur at regular intervals in time. English is therefore called a stress-timed language.

They should also be aware that in most sentences unless some sort of emphasis is introduced, only nouns, main verbs (not auxiliaries), adjectives and adverbs are stressed. Final pronouns should not be stressed unless some kind of contrast is intended. Relative pronouns should not be stressed, nor should possessive pronouns.

NOTE: There are a few words in English that are pronounced differently depending on whether or not they are stressed in the sentence. These are usually called strong and weak forms.

(c) Emphatic Stress – Candidates should be aware of the use of emphatic stress, most commonly to indicate a contrast, which is realized partly as a change in pitch within the intonation pattern. The falling pitch illustrated below is one of the common ways of indicating this.

INTONATION
Candidates should be made aware of the different forms English intonation takes in relation to the grammar of the language and the attitudes conveyed by the speaker.

There are two basic intonation patterns or tunes: the falling and rising patterns.

They should also realize that whereas the normal place for the changing pitch in an intonation pattern is on the last stressed syllable of the utterance (as indicated below), placing the changing pitch elsewhere implies a contrast to the item on which this changing pitch falls.

For example:

He borrowed “my newspaper – (i.e, not hers)
He “borrowed „my newspaper – (i.e, he did not steal it).
He borrowed my “newspaper – (i.e, not my book).
“He borrowed my „newspaper – (i.e, not someone else).
(a) Falling Pattern

(b) Rising Pattern

ALTERNATIVE B
Alternative B is a multiple-choice paper of 50 items testing the content of the syllabus as outlined for Alternative A.

The 50 items will cover the recognition of the following:

pure vowels
diphthongs
consonants
consonant clusters
word stress
 sentence stress
emphatic/contrastive stress
vowel and consonant contrast through rhymes.
ALTERNATIVE C: TEST OF ORALS (For School and Private Candidates in Nigeria)
A Test of Orals format is a multiple-choice paper of 60 items testing a wide range of areas or aspects of Orals as contained in the syllabus.

The Test of Orals will cover the following areas:

Vowels – pure vowels and diphthongs;
 Consonants (including clusters);
Rhymes;
Word Stress/Syllable Structure;
Emphatic Stress/Intonation Patterns;
Phonetic Symbols.