DEFINITION AND SCOPE OF ECONOMICS
Scarcity and Choice
Scale of Preference, Opportunity Cost,
Production Possibility Curve.
Economic activities
Production, Distribution and Consumption.
Classification of economic activities
Primary, Secondary and Tertiary and their relative contributions in terms of output/income, employment, savings, investment and foreign exchange.
FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
Land
labour
capital
entrepreneurship
meaning, characteristics and importance
TYPES AND BASIC FEATURES OF ECONOMIC SYSTEMS
Types
capitalism, socialism and mixed economy
Basic features of each
Advantages and disadvantages of each
The economic problems of society and the approaches for solving them under each of the systems.
BASIC TOOLS OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
Tables, graphs, and charts
Some basic statistical measures and representations:
arithmetic mean, median, mode and their simple applications.
DEMAND
Concept of demand and law of demand
the demand schedules and curve
reasons for exceptional demand curves
types of demand (derived, composite, joint and competitive)
factors determining a demand for goods and services – price of the commodity
prices of other commodities, income, tastes, price expectation, etc.
The distinction between a shift of and movement along a demand curve
the concept of elasticity of demand.
Types of elasticity of demand and their measurement – price, income and cross elasticities of demand:
the importance of the concept of elasticity of demand to consumers, producers and government.
SUPPLY
Concept of supply and law of supply
supply schedules and curve
types of Supply
composite
complementary
competitive.
Factors determining supply
input prices
technology
prices of other commodities
climatic factors, etc.
Distinction between the shift of and movement along the supply curve
Concept and measurement of elasticity of supply and its importance to producers and government
THEORY OF CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR
The utility concepts- total utility, average utility
marginal utility and the calculation of utility schedules.
The law of diminishing marginal utility
the relationship between total utility, average utility and marginal utility.
The concept of equilibrium of a consumer. Determination of consumer equilibrium.
The effects of changes in price on consumer equilibrium.
The relationship between marginal utility and the demand curve.
THEORY OF PRICE DETERMINATION
The Concept of the market; the interaction between demand and supply.
Price determination under free and regulated markets. Equilibrium price and quantity in product and factor markets.
The effects of changes in supply and demand on equilibrium prices and quantities.
Introduction to the algebraic determination of equilibrium price and quantity.
Price controls: maximum and minimum price regulations
meaning and their effects
rationing
black market (parallel market)
THEORY OF PRODUCTION
Production
division of labour and specialization
Scale of production
Internal and External economies
the concept of total, average and marginal productivity and the law of variable proportions.
THEORY OF COST AND REVENUE
Cost concepts
total cost
average cost
marginal cost
variable cost
fixed cost
short-run
long-run costs.
Distinction between economist’s and accountant’s view of cost
opportunity cost and money cost
Revenue concepts
total, average and marginal revenue
Marginal revenue Product
MARKET STRUCTURE
Concept of a market
characteristics of various market structures
determination of price and output under different structures
perfect competition and imperfect competition
monopoly and monopolistic competition.
Review of cost and revenue concepts.
Price discrimination.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS
Types and basic features of business enterprises
Sole Proprietorship
Partnership
Joint- Stock companies (Private and Public)
Co-operatives, Statutory Corporations
Joint ventures.
Sources of funds.
General and basic problems of business enterprises.
Privatization and Commercialization as solutions to problems of public enterprises.
Indigenization and nationalization policies.
DISTRIBUTIVE TRADE
Process of distribution
the role of producers
the role of wholesalers, retailers, and co-operatives
the role of government agencies in product distribution
the problems of distribution, and their solutions.
POPULATION AND LABOUR MARKET
Population
determination and implication of size and growth of population
Rural–urban migration
Malthusian theory of population
Geographical, age, sex and occupational distribution.
Importance and problems of the census.
Population and economic development (underpopulation, optimum population and overpopulation)
Labour Market
Concept of the labour force and human capital
efficiency and mobility of labour
factors affecting the size of the labour force
particularly the population characteristics (age, sex, occupation, education, etc.)
supply of and demand for labour:
wage determination
Concept of unemployment and underemployment
Trade Unions
Employers’ association and Government policies on labour and wages.
AGRICULTURE
Structure (e.g. food crops, export crops, livestock, fisheries)
systems of agriculture peasant, commercial, co-operative and state farming)
the importance of agriculture to the national economy
marketing of agricultural products (commodity boards).
INDUSTRIALIZATION
Meaning and types of industries.
Definition of industrial concepts:
plant, firm, industry, and industrial estates.
Location of industry
localization, and the role of industrialization in economic development.
Strategies of industrialization.
Problems of industrialization.
The link between agricultural and industrial development.
NATIONAL INCOME
Meaning of major national income concepts e.g.
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Product.
Net National Product, etc.
Different ways of measuring national income and their problems.
Uses and limitations of national income data; trends and structure of national income
MONEY AND INFLATION
Money
definition and historical development
barter and its problems
types, characteristics functions.
Supply of and demand for money, the value of money, and the price level.
Inflation:
meaning types
causes
effects and control.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Types
traditional
Central Bank
Commercial Bank
Development Bank
Merchant Bank
Insurance Companies
Building Societies
development and functions of financial institutions.
Money and capital markets;
meaning, types and functions
PUBLIC FINANCE
Fiscal policy and objectives of public finance:
Sources of government revenue.
Taxation
types(direct and indirect)
objectives
merits
demerits and incidence
Principles/canons of taxation
Rates of taxation(proportional, progressive and regressive)
direct and indirect taxation
incidence and effects of taxes; composition and structure of public expenditure (recurrent and capital expenditure)
effects of public expenditure. Government budget and the national debt.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING
Meaning of economic development
the distinction between economic growth and development
characteristics and problems of developing countries
elements of development planning
objectives of planning and problems of planning
Types of plans
short-term
medium-term
perspective
long-term
rolling plan, etc.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
International Trade:
differences between domestic and international trade
the basis of international trade
absolute and comparative cost advantage
terms of trade (definition and measurement)
commercial policy (objectives) and instruments –  tariffs (types) and direct control.
Trend and structure of West African countries’ external trade
Balance of Payments:
role of money in international transactions
meaning and components of the balance of payments
the balance of payments disequilibrium
the balance of payments adjustments (exchange rate policy exchange control
monetary and fiscal policies)
financing (the use of reserves and international borrowing).
ECONOMIC INTEGRATION
Economic Integration (objectives, levels of and features).
Development and problems of economic integration in West Africa – ECOWAS
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS
Development and role of:

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
African Development Bank (AfDB)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)etc., the relevance of such organizations to West African countries.
MAJOR NATURAL RESOURCES
Development of major natural resources
petroleum
gold
diamond
timber
groundnut, etc
Effects on West African economies
positive effects
negative effects