NUMBER AND NUMERATION
Number bases
conversion of numbers from one base to another
Basic operations on number bases
Modular Arithmetic
Concept of Modulo Arithmetic
Addition, subtraction, and multiplication operations in modulo arithmetic
Application to daily life
Fractions, Decimals and Approximations
Basic operations on fractions and decimals.
Approximations and significant figures.
Indices
Laws of indices
Numbers in standard form ( scientific notation)
Logarithms
Relationship between indices and logarithms: e.g., y = 10k implies log10y = k.
Basic rules of logarithms
Use of tables of logarithms and anti-logarithms
Calculations involving multiplication, division, powers, and roots.
Sequence and Series
Patterns of sequences.
Arithmetic progression (A.P.) and Geometric Progression (G.P.)
Sets
Idea of sets, universal sets, finite and infinite sets, subsets, empty sets, and disjoint sets.
Solution of practical problems involving classification using Venn diagrams.
Logical Reasoning
Simple statements.
True and false statements.
Negation of statements and implications.
Use of symbols: use of Venn diagrams
Positive and negative integers, rational numbers
The four basic operations on rational numbers.
Match rational numbers with points on the number line.
Notation: natural numbers (N), integers ( Z ), and rational numbers ( Q ).
Surds (Radicals)
Simplification and rationalization of simple surds.
Surds of the form, a and b, where a is a rational number and b is a positive integer.
Basic operations on surds (exclude surd of the form ).
Matrices and Determinants
Identification of order, notation, and types of matrices.
Addition, subtraction, scalar multiplication, and multiplication of matrices.
Determinant of a matrix
Ratio, Proportions and  Rates
The ratio between two similar quantities.
The proportion between two or more similar quantities.
Financial partnerships, rates of work, costs, taxes, foreign exchange, density (e.g., population), mass, distance, time, and speed.
Percentages
Simple interest, commission, discount, depreciation, profit and loss, compound interest, hire purchase, and percentage error.
Financial Arithmetic
Depreciation/Amortization.
Annuities
Capital Market Instruments
Variation
Direct, inverse, partial, and joint variations.
Application to simple, practical problems.
ALGEBRAIC PROCESSES
Algebraic expressions
Formulating algebraic expressions from given situations
Evaluation of algebraic expressions
Simple operations on algebraic expressions
Expansion
Factorization
Solution of Linear Equations
Linear equations in one variable
Simultaneous linear equations in two variables.
Change of Subject of a Formula/Relation
Change of subject of a formula or relationship
Substitution.
Quadratic Equations
Solution of quadratic equations
Forming a quadratic equation with the given roots.
Application of a solution to a quadratic equation in practical problems.
Graphs of Linear and Quadratic functions
Interpretation of graphs, the coordinate of points, tables of values, drawing quadratic graphs, and obtaining roots from graphs.
Graphical solution of a pair  of equations of the form: y = ax2 + bx + c and y = mx + k
drawing tangents to curves to determine the gradient at a given point.
Linear Inequalities
Solution of linear inequalities in one variable and representation on the number line.
Graphical solution of linear inequalities in two variables.
Graphical solution of simultaneous linear inequalities in two variables.
Algebraic Fractions
Operations on algebraic fractions with:

Monomial denominators
Binomial denominators
Functions and Relations
Types of Functions
One-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one, many-to-many.
Functions as a mapping, determination of the rule of a given mapping or function.
MENSURATION
Lengths and Perimeters
Use of Pythagoras theorem, sine, and cosine rules to determine lengths and distances.
lengths of arcs of circles, perimeters of sectors, and segments.
Longitudes and latitudes.
Areas
Triangles and special  quadrilaterals: rectangles, parallelograms and trapeziums
Circles, sectors, and segments of circles.
Surface areas of cubes, cuboids, cylinders, pyramids, right triangular prisms, cones, and spheres.
Areas of similar figures. Include the area of the triangle = ½ base x height and ½absinC.
Areas of compound shapes.
Relationship between the sector of a circle and the surface area of a cone.
Volumes
Volumes of cubes, cuboids, cylinders, cones, right pyramids and spheres.
Volumes of similar solids
PLANE GEOMETRY
Angles
Angles at a point add up to  360 degrees.
Adjacent angles on a straight line are supplementary.
Vertically opposite angles are equal.
Angles and intercepts on parallel lines
Alternate angles are equal.
Corresponding angles are equal.
Interior opposite angles are supplementary
Intercept theorem.
Triangles and polygons
The sum of the angles of a  triangle is 2 right angles.
The exterior angle of a triangle equals the sum of the two interior opposite angles.
congruent triangles.
Properties of special triangles: isosceles, equilateral, right-angled, etc
Properties of special quadrilaterals: parallelogram, rhombus,  square, rectangle, trapezium.
Properties of similar triangles.
The sum of the angles of a  polygon
Property of exterior angles of a polygon.
Parallelograms on the same base and between the same parallels are equal in area.
Circles
Chords.
The angle at which an arc of a  circle subtends at the centre of the circle is twice that which it subtends at any point on the remaining part of the circumference.
Any angle subtended at the circumference by a diameter is a right angle.
Angles in the same segment are equal.
Angles in opposite segments are supplementary.
Perpendicularity of tangent and radius.
If a tangent is drawn to a circle and from the point of contact a chord is drawn, each angle that this chord makes with the tangent is equal to the angle in the alternate segment.
Construction
Bisectors of angles and line segments
Line parallel or perpendicular to a given line.
Angles, e.g., 900, 600, 450, 300, and an angle equal to a given angle.
Triangles and quadrilaterals from sufficient data.
Loci
Knowledge of the loci listed below and their intersections in 2 dimensions.

Points at a given distance from a given point.
Points equidistant from two given points.
Points equidistant from two given straight lines.
Points at a given distance from a given straight line.
COORDINATE GEOMETRY OF  STRAIGHT LINES
Concept of the x-y plane
Coordinates of points on the x-y plane
TRIGONOMETRY
Sine, Cosine and Tangent of an angle.
Sine, Cosine and Tangent of acute angles.
Use of tables of trigonometric ratios.
Trigonometric ratios of 300, 450, and 600
Sine, cosine, and tangent of angles from 00 to 3600
Graphs of sine and cosine.
Graphs of trigonometric ratios.
Angles of elevation and depression
Calculating angles of elevation and depression.
Application to heights and distances.
Bearings
Bearing of one point from another.
Calculation of distances and angles
INTRODUCTORY CALCULUS
Differentiation of algebraic functions.
Integration of simple Algebraic functions.
Concept/meaning of differentiation/derived function: the relationship between the gradient of a curve at a point and the differential coefficient of the equation of the curve at that point.
Standard derivatives of some basic function, e.g., if y = x2, = 2x. If s = 2t3 + 4, = v = 6t2, where s = distance, t = time, and v = velocity.
Application to real-life situations such as maximum and minimum values, rates of change, etc.
Meaning or concept of integration, evaluation of simple definite algebraic equations.
STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY
Statistics
Frequency distribution
Pie charts, bar charts, histograms and frequency polygons
Mean, median, and mode for both discrete and grouped data.
Cumulative frequency curve (Ogive).
Measures of Dispersion: range, semi inter-quartile/inter-quartile range, variance, mean deviation and standard deviation
Probability
Experimental and theoretical probability.
Addition of probabilities for mutually exclusive and independent events.
Multiplication of probabilities for independent events.
VECTORS AND TRANSFORMATION
Vectors in a Plane
Vectors as a directed line segment.
Cartesian components of a vector
The magnitude of a vector, equal vectors, addition and subtraction of vectors, zero vector, parallel vectors, and multiplication of a vector by a scalar.
Transformation in the Cartesian Plane
Reflection of points and shapes in the Cartesian Plane.
Rotation of points and shapes in the Cartesian Plane.
Translation of points and shapes in the Cartesian Plane.
Enlargement
UNITS
Length
1000 millimetres (mm) = 100 centimetres (cm) = 1 metre(m).
1000 metres = 1 kilometre (km)
Area
10,000 square metres (m2) = 1 hectare (ha)
Capacity
1000 cubic centimeters (cm3) = 1 litre (l)
Mass
milligrammes (mg) = 1 gramme (g)
1000 grammes (g) = 1 kilogramme( kg )
1000 kilogrammes (kg) = 1 tonne.
Currencies
The Gambia – 100 bututs (b) = 1 Dalasi (D)
Ghana – 100 Ghana pesewas (Gp) = 1 Ghana Cedi ( GH¢)
Liberia – 100 cents (c) = 1 Liberian Dollar (LD)
Nigeria – 100 kobo (k) = 1 Naira (N)
Sierra Leone – 100 cents (c) = 1 Leone (Le)
UK – 100 pence (p) = 1 pound (£)
USA – 100 cents (c) = 1 dollar ($)
French Speaking territories: 100 centimes (c) = 1 Franc (fr)
facebook sharing button Sharetwitter sharing button Postwhatsapp sharing button Share