Introduction to Financial Accounting
History, nature and functions of Accounting.
Users of Accounting information.
Stages in the Accounting process.
Characteristics of Accounting information.
The Accounting Equation and  Double Entry Principles
Accounting Equation.
Purpose and functions of source documents.
Subsidiary books.
The ledger: classification of Accounts.
Cash Book: analytical cash book, including petty cash book.
Preparation of Trial Balance.
Bank Reconciliation Statements.
Correction of errors and Suspense Account.
Accounting Concepts
Meaning.
Types.
Significance.
Limitations.
The Final Accounts of a Sole Trader/proprietorship
Trading, profit and loss accounts/Income statement.
Balance sheet/statement of financial position.
Adjustments to final accounts.
Provisions and Reserves
Provision for doubtful debts/Allowance for doubtful debts.
Provision for discounts.
Depreciation – concepts, reasons for recording and methods:
straight line
reducing balance
sum of the years digits
revaluation.
Accounting for depreciation.
Reserves – revenue and capital reserves.
Manufacturing Accounts
Purpose of Manufacturing Accounts.
Cost classification in Manufacturing Accounts.
Preparation of final Accounts of Manufacturing concern.
Control Accounts and Self-balancing Ledgers
Meaning and uses of control accounts
Types:
sales ledger control
purchases ledger control
Preparation of Control Accounts
Reconciliation of Control Accounts
Single Entry and Incomplete Records
Meaning and limitations
Computation of profit or loss from opening and closing balance sheets.
Conversion of singe entry to double entry.
Preparation of final accounts from a set of incomplete records.
Mark up and Margin
Accounts of Not-for-Profit Making Organizations
Meaning and terminologies.
Receipts and payments accounts.
Subscriptions Account
Income and expenditure accounts.
Accumulated fund.
Balance sheet.
Profit or loss from income generating activities.
Partnership Accounts
Nature and formation of partnership.
Partnership agreements/Deed.
Profit and loss appropriation accounts.
Partners capital account and balance sheet
Admission of a new partner.
Treatment of goodwill and revaluation of assets
Dissolution of partnership (Questions will not be set on Garner V. Murray and piecemeal realization)
Company Accounts
Nature and formation of a company.
Types of companies and shares.
Issue of shares.
Loan capital, debentures/loan notes and mortgages.
Final accounts of company for internal use only.
Interpretation of accounts using simple ratios.
Purchase of business account.
*Statement of Cash Flow (using direct and indirect methods).
NOTE:  Separate questions may be set to meet statutory requirements of individual countries.  Candidates’ answers must meet statutory requirements of individual countries.

*Accounting for Value Added Tax
Purpose of VAT.
Characteristics of VAT.
Bases of computing input/output VAT.
Preparation of VAT returns.
Exempt goods and services.
Departmental and Branch Accounts
Meaning and importance
Differences between a department and branch.
Preparation of departmental account.
Preparation of Branch Account excluding foreign branches.
Inter branch transactions.
Public Sector Accounting
Meaning and difference between Public Sector and Private Sector Accounts.
Sources of public revenue.
Capital and recurrent expenditures.
Preparation of simple government accounts.
*Information Technology in Accounting
Manual and computerized Accounting Processing Systems.
Processes involved in data processing.
Computer Hardware and Software.
Merits and demerits of manual and computerized accounting processing systems.
**Miscellaneous Accounts
Meaning, introduction, terminologies and preparation of simple:
Joint Venture Accounts
Consignment Accounts
Contract Accounts
Hire Purchase Accounts
**Financial system
Meaning and components.
Meaning, functions and features of:
money market;capital market;insurance market.
Methods of raising funds from the capital market:
offer for sale;
offer for subscription;
rights issue;
private placement;
Requirements for accessing the capital market
Benefits of the capital market to:
investors;
government;
economy;
individual company;
Types, features and reasons for regulation.
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOKS
 Business Accounting volume 1 - West African Edition by Frank Wood and Omunya.
Business Accounting Volume 2  - Frank Wood.
Accounting and Finance - Frank Wood.
Foundation Accounting  - A. H. Millchamp.
Basic Accounting  - J. D.  Magee.
Accounting for Senior Secondary School - S. C. Malhorta, P. K. Botchweyand, P. A. Amankwah.
Accounting in Business - R. J. Bull.
Company Accounts - J. N. Amorin.
Principles of Accounting - K. B. Appiah Mensah
Incorporated private Partnership Act 1962, Act 152.