Pure Mathematics
Sets
Idea of a set defined by a property, Set notations and their meanings.
Disjoint sets, Universal sets and complement of a set
Venn diagrams, Use of sets And Venn diagrams to solve problems.
Commutative and Associative laws, Distributive properties over union and intersection.
Surds
Surds of the form , a and a+b, where a is rational, b is a positive integer, and n is not a perfect square.
Binary Operations
Closure, Commutativity, Associativity and Distributivity, Identity elements and inverses.
Logical Reasoning
Rule of syntax: true or false statements, rule of logic applied to arguments, implications and deductions.
The truth table
Functions
Domain and co-domain of a  function.
One-to-one, onto, identity and constant mapping;
Inverse of a function.
Composite of functions.
Polynomial Functions
Linear Functions, Equations and Inequality
Quadratic Functions, Equations  and Inequalities
Cubic Functions and Equations
Rational Functions
Rational functions of the form Q(x) = g(x) 0. where g(x) and f(x) are polynomials. e.g. f:x
Resolution of rational functions into partial fractions.
Indices and Logarithmic Functions
Indices
Logarithms
Permutation And Combinations
Simple cases of arrangements
Simple cases of selection of objects.
Binomial Theorem
Expansion of (a + b)n.  Use of (1+x)n ≈1+nx for any rational n, where x is sufficiently small. e.g (0.998)1/3
Sequences and Series
Finite and Infinite sequences.
Linear sequence/Arithmetic Progression (A.P.) and Exponential sequence/Geometric Progression (G.P.)
(iii) Finite and Infinite series.
Linear series (sum of A.P.) and exponential series (sum of G.P.)
* Recurrence Series
Matrices and Linear Transformation
Matrices
Determinants
Inverse of 2 x 2 Matrices
Linear Transformation
Trigonometry
Trigonometric Ratios and Rules
Compound and Multiple Angles.
Trigonometric Functions and Equations
Co-ordinate Geometry
Straight Lines
Conic Sections
Differentiation
The idea of a limit
The derivative of a function
Differentiation of polynomials
Differentiation of Trigonometric Functions
Product and quotient rules. Differentiation of implicit functions such as ax2 + by2 = c
**Differentiation of Transcendental Functions
Second-order derivatives and Rates of change and small changes (x)
Concept of Maxima and Minima
Integration
Indefinite Integral
Definite Integral
Applications of the Definite Integral
Statistics and Probability
Statistics
Tabulation and Graphical representation of data
Measures of location Probability
Measures of Dispersion
Correlation
Probability
Meaning of probability.
Relative frequency.
Calculation of Probability using simple sample spaces.
Addition and multiplication of probabilities.
Probability distributions.
Vectors and Mechanics
Vectors
Definitions of scalar and vector Quantities.
Representation of Vectors.
Algebra of Vectors.
Commutative, Associative and Distributive Properties.
Unit vectors.
Position Vectors.
Resolution and Composition of Vectors.
Scalar (dot) product and its application.
**Vector (cross) product and its application.
Statics
Definition of a force.
Representation of forces.
Composition and resolution of coplanar forces acting at a point.
Composition and resolution of general coplanar forces on rigid bodies.
Equilibrium of Bodies.
Determination of Resultant.
Moments of force.
Friction.
Dynamics
The concepts of motion
Equations of Motion
The impulse and momentum equations:
**Projectiles.
UNITS
Length
1000 millimetres (mm) = 100 centimetres (cm) = 1 metre(m).
1000 metres = 1 kilometre (km)
Area
10,000 square metres (m2) = 1 hectare (ha)
Capacity
1000 cubic centimeters (cm3) = 1 litre (l)
Mass
milligrammes (mg) = 1 gramme (g)
1000 grammes (g) = 1 kilogramme( kg )
1000 kilogrammes (kg) = 1 tonne.
Currencies
The Gambia – 100 bututs (b) = 1 Dalasi (D)
Ghana – 100 Ghana pesewas (Gp) = 1 Ghana Cedi ( GH¢)
Liberia – 100 cents (c) = 1 Liberian Dollar (LD)
Nigeria – 100 kobo (k) = 1 Naira (N)
Sierra Leone – 100 cents (c) = 1 Leone (Le)
UK – 100 pence (p) = 1 pound (£)
USA – 100 cents (c) = 1 dollar ($)
French Speaking territories 100 centimes (c) = 1 Franc (fr)
Any other units used will be defined.
OTHER IMPORTANT INFORMATION
Use of Mathematical and Statistical Tables
Mathematics and Statistical tables published or approved by WAEC may be used in the examination room. Where the degree of accuracy is not specified in a question, the degree of accuracy expected will be that obtainable from the mathematical tables.

Use of calculators
The use of non-programmable, silent and cordless calculators is allowed. The calculators must, however, not have a paper printout nor be capable of receiving/sending any information. Phones with or without calculators are not allowed.

Other Materials Required for the Examination
Candidates should bring rulers, pairs of compasses, protractors, set squares, etc required for the subject papers. They will not be allowed to borrow such instruments or any other material from other candidates in the examination hall.

Graph papers ruled in 2mm squares will be provided for any paper for which they are required.